. On the one hand, one can fix the coordinate freedom only asymptotically in which case the asymptotic symmetry algebra appears
as the quotient algebra of allowed, modulo an ideal of trivial, infinitesimal transformationsThe advantage of this approach is that it is easier to show that specific solutions
SUPERTRANSLATIONS AND SUPERROTATIONS 3
to the equations of motion are admissible, i.e., asymptotically flat in the case of interest
here.



When one chooses to fix the coordinate freedom completely on the other hand,
the asymptotic symmetry algebra appears as the residual “global” symmetry algebra after
gauge fixing and no longer depends on arbitrary functions of the bulk spacetime. The advantage of this “reduced phase space” approach is that only physical degrees of freedom
remain. A standard example illustrating this difference is the Brown-Henneaux [4] versus
the Feffermann-Graham [5, 6] definition of asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetimes in
three dimensions. // given that the 

Supertranslations call for superrotations

https://arxiv.org/pdf/1102.4632

https://arxiv.org/pdf/1106.0213

BMS charge algebra



Asymptotic versus complete gauge fixations. Realizations
There are basically two attitudes to the problem. On the one hand, one can fix the coordinate freedom only asymptotically in which case the asymptotic symmetry algebra appears
as the quotient algebra of allowed, modulo an ideal of trivial, infinitesimal transformations. The advantage of this approach is that it is easier to show that specific solutions
SUPERTRANSLATIONS AND SUPERROTATIONS 3


to the equations of motion are admissible, i.e., asymptotically flat in the case of interest
here. When one chooses to fix the coordinate freedom completely on the other hand,
the asymptotic symmetry algebra appears as the residual “global” symmetry algebra after
gauge fixing and no longer depends on arbitrary functions of the bulk spacetime. The advantage of this “reduced phase space” approach is that only physical degrees of freedom
remain. A standard example illustrating this difference is the Brown-Henneaux [4] versus
the Feffermann-Graham [5, 6] definition of asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetimes in
three dimensions.
Recently in [7, 8], we have followed the latter approach in the asymptotically flat
case by using a Bondi-Metzner-Sachs type of gauge in four dimensions [9, 10, 11] and a
reasonable analog thereof in three. In particular, the asymptotic symmetry algebras to be
discussed below have explicitly been shown to be the same whether one fixes the gauge
completely or only asymptotically. Furthermore, as suggested by Penrose’s conformal
approach to asymptotically flat spacetimes [12, 13, 14], we have considered classes of
gauge fixations differing by a choice of the conformal factor for the degenerate metric on
Scri and have investigated the behavior of the theory under changes of such gauges.
From this point of view, the Newman-Unti (NU) approach to asymptotically flat
spacetimes [15] corresponds to a different gauge choice for the radial coordinate. In
view of its embedding in the widely used Newman-Penrose formalism [16] and its direct
relevance in many applications, see e.g. the review article [17], it is worthwhile to show
that the asymptotic symmetry algebra is unchanged and to provide explicit formulae for
the realization of the algebra in this gauge. This has been done in [18].
A novel result in our study concerns the realization of the asymptotic algebra not only
on the boundary Scri but in the bulk gauge fixed spacetime by using a natural modification
of the Lie bracket for vector fields that depend on the metric and is related to the theory of
Lie algebroids [19]. Furthermore, this modified bracket is also needed for the realization
on Scri in order to disentangle the gauge transformations from the residual global symmetries when allowing for changes of the conformal factor. We have also studied in detail
how the symmetry algebra is realized on the arbitrary functions parametrizing solution
space.