CAV 
Artifact 
Evaluation Reusable 
Synthesis of Temporal Causality 
arXiv:2405.10912v4 [cs.LO] 17 Jun 2025 
Bernd Finkbeiner , Hadar Frenkel , Niklas Metzger , and Julian Siber(B) 
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbr¨ucken, Germany {finkbeiner,hadar.frenkel,niklas.metzger,julian.siber}@cispa.de 
Abstract. We present an automata-based algorithm to synthesize ω regular causes for ω-regular effects on executions of a reactive system, such as counterexamples uncovered by a model checker. Our theory is a generalization of temporal causality, which has recently been proposed as a framework for drawing causal relationships between trace properties on a given trace. So far, algorithms exist only for verifying a single causal relationship and, as an extension, cause synthesis through enumeration, which is complete only for a small fragment of effect properties. This work presents the first complete cause-synthesis algorithm for the class of ω regular effects. We show that in this case, causes are guaranteed to be ω regular themselves and can be computed as, e.g., nondeterministic B¨uchi automata. We demonstrate the practical feasibility of this algorithm with a prototype tool and evaluate its performance for cause synthesis and cause checking. 
Keywords: Actual causality · Cause synthesis · Reactive systems · Tem poral logic · B¨uchi automata 
1 Introduction 
Causality is a key ingredient for explaining model-checking results [5,15,37,45] and a reasoning tool in several verification and synthesis algorithms [2,35,36]. These techniques have retrofitted causality definitions from philosophy [32,39] and artificial intelligence [30], which were not designed for reactive systems with infinite dynamics and often fall short in such ad-hoc applications. For instance, popular approaches for explaining model-checking results highlight the coun terexample trace at events that constitute causes [7,18,31]. Yet, marking a (pos sibly infinite) set of events does not clearly describe the temporal behavior man ifested by them since, e.g., two events can be individually responsible for the effect or only together. Similarly, the occurrence of events in the loop part of a trace can be relevant, e.g., only once or infinitely often. 
To address such reoccurring problems arising with causal reasoning in re active systems, Coenen et al. have recently proposed temporal causality for drawing causal relationships between temporal properties on a given trace of a system [19]. Causal properties can then be described symbolically with log ics or automata, which give a concise description of the possibly infinite causal behavior, and are, moreover, amenable to verification algorithms.
2 Finkbeiner et al. 
1.1 Temporal Causality 
At its core, temporal causality uses counterfactual reasoning to infer a causal relationship: A property is a cause for some effect property on a given trace, where both properties hold, if on all closest traces that do not satisfy the cause, the effect is not satisfied either. Additionally, the cause property has to be se mantically minimal. Hence, it is a form of actual causation [29], which describes the concrete causal behavior in the given, actual observation (the trace), and not all of the system behavior that may cause the effect (which loosely corresponds to the concept of general causation).1 
To illustrate, consider the system de 
picted in Fig. 1, where x and y are inputs and e is an output. We are interested in what input behavior causes the effect e on the trace π = ({x, e})ω – we skip the output label of the first position. Our first 
x ∧ ¬y 
{} 
x ⊤ 
y 
guess may be y ∨ x, which characterizes 
{e} {e} 
all system traces that satisfy e. How ever, this is too general to describe the causal behavior on π. After all, the left 
¬x 
x 
¬x ∧ ¬y 
disjunct y is not even satisfied by π. Let 
¬x 
{} 
us see which condition fails. The counter 
factual criterion holds: The closest system traces that do not satisfy y ∨ x also do not satisfy the effect, as these are exactly 
Fig. 1: Example system. 
the traces that go directly to the lower state labeled with the empty set and loop there infinitely. However, minimality is not satisfied, as the property x implies y∨ x (i.e., is semantically smaller) and also satisfies the counterfactual criterion: the closest trace that does not satisfy it is ({})ω. In particular, the existence of, e.g., trace {y, e}({})ω that also does not satisfy the cause x, but still satisfies the effect e, is irrelevant, as ({})ω is closer to π than the trace {y, e}({})ω. It is worth pointing out that we only measure distance over inputs. Picking a property that is too small fails the counterfactual criterion: If we picked 
x, which implies x, there would be, e.g., the closest trace {}({x, e})ω that still satisfies the effect. 
In their original work [19], Coenen et al. showed that the requirements for a valid causal relationship can be encoded as a hyperproperty [17], such that check ing whether a given ω-regular property is indeed the cause for a given ω-regular effect on a trace can be decided via model checking. This has recently been implemented in a sketch-based algorithm for enumerating causes [11], which is complete for effects containing as the only temporal operator. That approach, of course, covers only a tiny fragment of the original theory. How to compute the cause for an arbitrary ω-regular effect has remained an open question. 
1 Actual and general causality are also called token and type causality in the literature.
Synthesis of Temporal Causality 3 
1.2 Contributions and Structure 
As it turns out, the intricate balance between the counterfactual criterion and minimality of temporal causality gives rise to an intuitive order-theoretic char acterization of causes: The complement of the cause is the upward closure of the negated effect property in the partial order defined by the similarity relation (measuring distance from the actual trace). We illustrate the intuition behind this characterization in Section 3.1, and formally prove it in Section 5.1. 
The consequence of our characterization is that if we can compute the up ward closure of the negated effect E and the complement of the result, then we can compute the cause for E on π. We show that if E is an ω-regular property, π in a lasso shape, and the similarity relation is also defined by a (relational) ω-regular property, such an upward closure can be constructed as a nondeter ministic B¨uchi automaton, which means that the cause (i.e., the complement of the automaton) again is an ω-regular property. This approach forms the core of our cause synthesis algorithm, which we describe in Section 5. 
The complexity of our algorithm significantly scales in the size of the de scription of the similarity relation, which is problematic due to the complex and large similarity relations of previous work. Coenen et al. [19] observed that with the original counterfactual criterion, these similarity relations need to satisfy the assumption that there is a non-empty set of closest traces for any actual trace and candidate cause, otherwise the counterfactual condition can be vac uously true. We tie this restriction to the limit assumption first introduced by Lewis [40] and study similarity relations through this lens. Concrete similarity relations that have been proposed so far [11,19] satisfy the limit assumption by adding additional criteria, but these increase the size of the formula describing the similarity relation significantly. In Section 4, we show that we can instead modify the counterfactual condition of the causality definition to allow similar ity relations that do not satisfy the limit assumption, using Lewis’ semantics for counterfactuals [40], as extended to non-total similarity relations by Finkbeiner and Siber [22]. Crucially, this modification retains the original semantics of Co enen et al. for similarity relations that satisfy the limit assumption as long as the actual trace is deterministic. Hence, it generalizes our closure-based char acterization and the corresponding algorithm to significantly simpler similarity relations. 
In Section 6, we show through experiments with our prototype tool CORP that our modified counterfactual criterion leads to significantly faster computa tions in practice. We further compare our cause synthesis algorithm with the incomplete sketching approach of the tool CATS [11]. Last, we extend our ap proach to cause checking through cause synthesis with an additional equivalence check, which we compare with the checker implemented in CATS. 
Contributions. In summary, we make the following contributions: 
– We extend the theory of temporal causality to similarity relations that do not satisfy the limit assumption.
4 Finkbeiner et al. 
– We prove an order-theoretic characterization of causes as downward closed sets of the similarity relation. 
– Based on this characterization, we develop the first complete method for ω-regular cause synthesis. 
– We present and evaluate a prototype implementation of our approach. 
2 Preliminaries 
We start by recalling preliminaries regarding our system model. Then, we provide background on automata and logics for describing temporal properties. 
Systems and Traces. We model systems as nondeterministic finite state ma chines T = (S, s0, AP, δ, l) where S is a finite set of states, s0 ∈ S is the initial state, AP = I ∪· O is the set of atomic propositions consisting of inputs I and outputs O, δ : S × 2I → 2S is the transition function determining a set of successor states for a given state and input, and l : S → 2O is the labeling function mapping each state to a set of outputs. A trace of T is an infinite sequence π = π[0]π[1] . . . ∈ (2AP )ω, with π[i] = A ∪ l(si+1) for some A ⊆ I and si+1 ∈ δ(si, A) for all i ≥ 0, i.e., we skip the label of the initial state in the first position. traces(T ) is the set of all traces of T . For two subsets of atomic propositions V , W ⊆ AP, let V |W = V ∩ W , π|W = π0|W π1|W . . . and π =V π′iff π|V = π′|V for traces π, π′. A trace π0 is deterministic in T iff for all π1 ∈ traces(T ) : π0 =I π1 → π0 = π1. A trace π is lasso-shaped, if there exist i, j = i+ 1, k ∈ N such that π = π0 . . . πi·(πj . . . πk)ω, we then define |π| = k −1. 
B¨uchi Automata. A nondeterministic B¨uchi automaton (NBA) [13] is a tuple A = (Q, Σ, Q0, F, ∆), where Q denotes a finite set of states, Σ is a finite alphabet, Q0 ⊆ Q is a set of initial states, F ⊆ Q is the set of accepting states, and ∆ : Q×Σ → 2Q is the transition function that maps a state and a letter to a set of possible successor states. The size of an NBA |A| is the number of its states |Q|. A run of A on an infinite word w = w1w2 . . . ∈ Σω is an infinite sequence r = q0q1 . . . ∈ Qω with q0 ∈ Q0 and qi+1 ∈ ∆(qi, wi) for all i ∈ N. A run r of the NBA is accepting if there exist infinitely many i ∈ N such that qi ∈ F. The language L(A) is the set of all words that have an accepting run. We say that some trace property P ⊆ (2A)ω is ω-regular, if there is an NBA A such that L(A) = P. A trace π satisfies any P ⊆ (2A)ω, denoted by π ⊨ P, iff π|A ∈ P. 
Linear-time Temporal Logic. We use Linear-time Temporal Logic (LTL) [43] to succinctly specify a fragment of ω-regular properties throughout the paper. LTL formulas are built using the following grammar, where a ∈ AP: 
φ ::= a | ¬φ | φ ∧ φ | φ | φ U φ .
Synthesis of Temporal Causality 5 
The semantics of LTL are given by the following satisfaction relation, which recurses over the positions i of the trace π. 
π, i ⊨ a iff a ∈ π[i] 
π, i ⊨ ¬φ iff π, i ⊭ φ 
π, i ⊨ φ ∧ ψ iff π, i ⊨ φ and π, i ⊨ ψ 
π, i ⊨ φ iff π, i + 1 ⊨ φ 
π, i ⊨ φ U ψ iff ∃j ≥ i such that π, j ⊨ ψ and ∀i ≤ k < j. π, k ⊨ φ 
A trace π satisfies a formula φ, denoted by π ⊨ φ iff the formula holds at the first position: π, 0 ⊨ φ. The language L(φ) is the set of all traces that satisfy a formula φ. We also consider the usual derived Boolean connectives: ∨, →, ↔; and temporal operators: φ R ψ ≡ ¬(¬φ U ¬ψ), φ ≡ true U φ, φ ≡ false R φ. 
Relational Properties. Relational properties, or, hyperproperties [17], allow us to relate multiple system executions, and reason about their interaction. Coun terfactual causality is a hyperproperty, and in particular, temporal causality as defined by Coenen et al. was shown to be a hyperproperty [19]. Many logics to express temporal hyperproperties have been suggested in recent years (e.g., [27,8,6,10]), the most prominent one being HyperLTL [16]. In this paper, we do not use a hyperlogic to express temporal causality, but we use the related notion of zipped traces (e.g., [9]) for definig similarity relations. A zipped trace of three traces π0,1,2 is defined as zip(π0, π1, π2)[i] = {(a, tk) | a ∈ πk[i]}, i.e., we con struct the zipped trace from disjoint unions of the positions of the three traces, where atomic propositions from the traces π0,1,2 are distinguished through pair ing them with the trace variables t0,1,2. 
3 Overview: The Topology of Causality 
Our main results on cause synthesis heavily rely on a characterization of causes as certain downward closed sets of system traces that are ordered by a simi larity relation. We illustrate the main intuition behind this characterization in Section 3.1. Then, in Section 3.2, we outline how we extend this result to more general similarity relations than originally considered by Coenen et al. [19]. 
3.1 Actual Causes as Downward Closed Sets of Traces 
Our central theorem states that the temporal cause for an effect E on some actual trace π is the largest subset of E that is downward closed2in the preordered set of system traces (traces(T ), ≤π), where ≤π is a (comparative) similarity relation that orders traces based on their similarity to π. Figure 2a illustrates this abstractly. Arrows together with nodes represent system executions, whose 
2 X ⊆ traces(T ) is downward (upward) closed in (traces(T ), ≤π) if for all πx ∈ X and πt ∈ traces(T ), πt ≤π πx (πx ≤π πt) implies πt ∈ X.
6 Finkbeiner et al. 
E 
C 
πa >π πb >π π <π πc <π πd 
Without limit assumption: 
∀∃ ∀∃ 
π . . . . . . ≤π πi . . . ≤π πj . . . ∞ 
With limit assumption: 
∀ 
π . . . ≤π πi . . . ≤π πj . . . 
(a) The cause C as a subset of the effect E. 
(b) Possible situations at the limit of C. 
Fig. 2: Two highlighted aspects of the cause C in the preordered set (traces(T ), ≤π). Figure 2a illustrates that the cause is the largest downward closed subset of the effect E. The quantifiers in Figure 2b show which traces outside of the cause are required to avoid the effect in our formalization (without limit assumption) and in Coenen et al.’s definition [19] (with limit assumption). 
traces form traces(T ) and are ordered by the irreflexive reduction <π of the similarity relation. The set of system traces is, in general, infinite, such that there may be infinitely many other traces which are omitted from the illustration for sake of clarity. However, note that similarity relations must be designed such that all traces are further away from the actual trace π than itself, i.e., π is a minimum of ≤π. The set of traces that satisfy the effect is depicted by the area that is colored in light blue. The actual trace π is an element of this set, as this is the trace on which the cause for a given effect is analyzed. 
Coenen et al.’s temporal causality is counterfactual in nature, and now re quires that the closest traces outside of the cause C, which in Figure 2a is marked by the red border, do not satisfy the effect. In the illustration, this is reflected by πb and πc not satisfying the effect, i.e., not being in a light blue area. At the same time, Coenen et al. require the cause to be the smallest set that satisfies this, which means that only traces that satisfy the effect are included: Otherwise, the upward closure3 of traces that do not satisfy the effect could be removed. Hence, in Figure 2a the area inside the red border is light blue. 
In this paper, we show that the balance between these criteria defines causes that are the largest subsets of E that are downward closed in the preordered set (traces(T ), ≤π). We also propose an algorithm that constructs these causes for effects that are ω-regular properties and traces that are in a lasso-shape. Our algorithm first constructs a nondeterministic B¨uchi automaton for the com plement of the cause C. This complement is the upward closure of the negated effect E, which means it includes all traces for which there exists an at-least-as close trace that does not satisfy the effect. Since ≤π is reflexive, this naturally includes all traces in E, such as πb and πc in Figure 2a. It also includes all traces that are further away than a trace in E, such as πa and πd. 
3 The upward closure of a set X is the smallest upward closed set containing X.
Synthesis of Temporal Causality 7 
In the end, these mechanisms make temporal causality a form of actual causality that describes a local generalization of the behavior that causes the effect on the actual trace. In the introductory example from Figure 1 with the actual trace π = {x, e}ω, traces in, e.g., L(y ∧ ¬ x) are all further away from π than the trace {}ω, which is in E = L( ¬e). Hence, L(y ∧ ¬ x) is included in the upward closure of E, and none of its elements is included in the cause. 
3.2 Causality Without the Limit Assumption 
With our approach based on set closure, we can solve a central issue of temporal causality: Since the preordered set (traces(T ), ≤π) is infinite, there only exist traces in C that are the closest with respect to the actual trace π if (C, ≤π) is well-founded. If this is the case for all possible pairs of actual trace π and cause candidate C, we say the similarity relation satisfies the limit assumption, after Lewis [40], who formalized it for counterfactual modal logic. Since Coenen et al.’s definition [19] requires that all closest traces avoid the effect, it is restricted to similarity relations that satisfy this assumption. Their counterfactual condition is illustrated in the lower part of Figure 2b. If the limit assumption holds, any descending chain πj ≥π πj−1 ≥π . . . stabilizes at some πi, for which Coenen et al. require πi ∈ E. 
If the limit assumption does not hold (upper part of Figure 2b), there may be infinite chains πj ≥π πj−1 ≥ . . . for which a closest πi does not exist. In these instances, Coenen et al.’s criterion would be vacuously true. This is particularly problematic as the canonical similarity relation ≤subset 
π does not satisfy the limit 
assumption. This metric orders two traces as πj ≤subset 
π πk if the changes be tween πj and π are a subset of the changes between πk and π. This may lead, for example, to the infinite chain {}ω ≥subset 
π {x}{}ω ≥subset 
π. . . in the pre ordered set (L( ¬x), ≤subset 
π), where π = {x}ω. Coenen et al. add additional 
constraints on top of ≤subset 
πto ensure that it satisfies the limit assumption. 
These, however, make cause checking more expensive, as observed by Beutner et al. [11], who therefore combine ≤subset 
π with a vacuity check. While this is 
computationally better, this check simply fails in instances as outlined above, and so certain causes cannot be checked by this method [11]. In this work, we solve this conundrum by modifying the definition of temporal causality to accommodate similarity relations that satisfy the limit assumption. We change the central counterfactual condition from a universal quantification over the closest traces in C to an ∀∃-quantification over all traces πj ∈ C. For each such trace πj , we require the existence of a closer trace πi ≤π πj that does not satisfy the effect. This is depicted in the upper part of Figure 2b. Naturally, this quantification mirrors exactly the characterization of cause-complements via upward closed sets (cf. Section 5.1). On the theoretical side, we show that if the similarity relation satisfies the limit assumption and a minor assumption on nondeterminism is met, our definition is equivalent to Coenen et al.’s original definition (Section 4.3). On the practical side, we confirm experimentally that our approach leads to significant improvements through the accommodation of simpler similarity relations that do not satisfy the limit assumption (Section 6).
8 Finkbeiner et al. 
4 Generalized Temporal Causality 
In this section, we generalize the definition of temporal causality to accommo date similarity relations that do not satisfy the limit assumption. We first recall similarity relations and formalize the limit aussmption (Section 4.1). Then we present our updated definition of temporal causality (Section 4.2). Last, we prove that it retains the original semantics in the special case considered by Coenen et al. with a minor additional assumption on nondeterminism (Section 4.3). 
4.1 Similarity Relations and the Limit Assumption 
A comparative similarity relation ≤π ⊆ (2I)ω × (2I)ω is a partial order that orders traces by their comparative distance from the given actual trace π, i.e., it gives no quantitative but a relative measurement of distance: π0 ≤π π1 means π0 is at-least-as close to π as π1. We measure distance over the set of inputs I, i.e., for two traces π0,1 ∈ (2AP )ω we are only interested in π0|I ≤π π1|I . 
If I is clear from the context, we write π0 ≤π π1. We require the actual trace to be closer to itself than any other trace, i.e., π ≤π π′for all π′ ∈ (2AP )ω. The ternary relation ≤, where (π0, π1, π2) ∈ ≤ iff π1 ≤π0 π2, encodes the comparative similarity relations of all possible actual traces π0. 
Example 1. To illustrate our formalism for similarity relations, consider the following subset-based similarity relation ≤subset defined via the zipped trace zip(π0, π1, π2) ∈ (2AP×{t0,t1,t2})ω. To ease comprehension, for some a ∈ AP we write aactual for (a, t0), aclose for (a, t1), and afar for (a, t2) to explicitly iden tify, e.g., propositions on the actual trace, in a given formula. We then have πclose ≤subset 
πactualπclose iff 
zip(πactual , πclose , πfar ) ⊨^ 
 
i∈I 
(iactual ̸↔ iclose ) → (iactual ̸↔ ifar ) . 
For the three traces πactual , πclose , πfar this requirement states that the changes between πactual and πclose are a subset of the changes between πactual and πfar , where we define the changes between two traces π0, π1 as changes(π0, π1) = {(a, i) | π0[i] ̸={a} π1[i]}. For example, let π = {x}({})ω, π0 = {}({})ω, π1 = {}{y}({})ω and I = {x, y}. Then, π0 ≤π π1, since changes(π, π0) = {(x, 0)} ⊆ {(x, 0),(y, 1)} = changes(π, π1). The trace π2 = {x}({y})ω, however, is incom parable to π0 and π1, as changes(π, π2) = {(y, j) | j ≥ 1} is not in any subset relationship with the respective sets for π0, π1. 
The similarity relations considered in previous works [11,19] are all funda mentally based on ≤subset as defined in Example 1, with added conditions to avoid infinite chains of closer traces. This is directly tied to the limit assumption first studied by Lewis in his seminal work on counterfactual modal logic [40]. In our setting, this assumption can be formalized as follows.
Synthesis of Temporal Causality 9 
Definition 1 (Limit Assumption). A similarity relation ≤ ⊆ (2I)ω ×(2I)ω × (2I)ω satisfies the limit assumption, if for all traces π ∈ (2I∪O)ω and all possible causes C ⊆ (2I)ω, we have that (C, <π) is well-founded, i.e., there is no infinite descending chain π0 >π π1 >π . . . with πi ∈ C. 
This requirement means that there always exist closest counterfactual traces that do not satisfy the cause no matter which actual trace we pick (except if all traces satisfy the cause). These closest traces would be ideal candidates for causal analysis, but unfortunately, they do not always exist, in particular not for the similarity relation ≤subset, as stated in Proposition 1. Its proof, like all others, is in Appendix A.2 due to space reasons. 
Proposition 1. ≤subset does not satisfy the limit assumption. 
Since the original definition of Coenen et al. [19] quantifies universally over closest traces, it can be vacuously satisfied if the similarity relation does not satisfy the limit assumption. Previous works have therefore added additional constraints. For instance, Beutner et al. [11] propose ≤full , which additionally to the constraints of ≤subset (cf. Example 1) requires the following: 
zip(πactual , πclose , πfar ) ⊨^ 
 
i∈I 
(iactual ̸↔ iclose ) → (iclose ↔ ifar ) . 
This encodes that whenever πclose differs differs from πactual on some input at infinitely many locations, then πfar agrees with πclose on this input. Hence, on any chain in <full 
π, infinite changes on some i ∈ I eventually get converted into finite ones, which ensures finiteness of the chain since there are only finitely many atomic propositions. We confirm that this results in ≤full satisfying the limit assumption. 
Proposition 2. ≤full satisfies the limit assumption. 
While satisfying the limit assumption is, in principle, useful, in the case of ≤full this comes at a significant cost: Its logical description contains a large conjunction over the inputs, each containing an implication between temporal formulas. Hence, any algorithmic approach to cause synthesis (and checking) that uses ≤full will scale poorly in the size of I. This motivates us to develop a modified definition of temporal causality that can directly work with the smaller, canonical similarity relation ≤subset, while retaining most of the original seman tics of Coenen et al. for similarity relations that satisfy the limit assumption, such as ≤full. 
4.2 A General Definition of Temporal Causality 
We now develop our generalized definition of temporal causality for similarity relations that do not satisfy the limit assumption. 
The idea behind our generalization stems from counterfactual modal logic as formalized by Lewis [40]. Lewis’ semantics a priori only work for total similarity
10 Finkbeiner et al. 
relations, making them unsuitable for our setting. However, they were recently extended to non-total similarity relations by Finkbeiner and Siber [22]. We ap ply these semantics to our concrete problem to obtain a well-defined notion of causality for similarity relations that do not satisfy the limit assumption. In Sec tion 4.3, we show that our definition retains the original semantics proposed by Coenen et al. for similarity relations that satisfy the limit assumption. 
Definition 2 (Temporal Causality). Let T be a system, π ∈ traces(T ) a trace, ≤π a similarity relation, and E ⊆ (2AP )ω an effect property. We say that C ⊆ (2I)ω is a cause of E on π in T if the following conditions hold. 
SAT: For all π0 ∈ traces(T ) such that π0 =I π we have π0|I ∈ C and π0 ∈ E. CF: For all π0 ∈ C there is an at-least-as close trace π1 ∈ C, i.e., with π1 ≤π π0, such that there is a π2 ∈ traces(T ) with π1 =I π2 and π2 ∈ E. MIN: There is no C′ ⊂ C such that C′satisfies SAT and CF. 
The main idea of the counterfactual criterion CF is that for every trace π0 that does not satisfy the cause, there exists a closer trace π2 that does not satisfy the cause and the effect. The additional quantification over π1 is a technicality included because the cause C ⊆ (2I)ω consists of input sequences while π2 ∈ traces(T ) is a full system trace. It also closely mirrors the structure of Coenen et al.’s PC2 criterion (cf. Definition 3) which it neatly generalizes to similarity relations that do not satisfy the limit assumption: If the assumption holds, then a π2 is, in particular, required for the closest traces π0 in C, for which π2 can only be instantiated by themselves. Hence, the closest traces are required to not satisfy the effect (we develop this comparison more formally in Section 4.3). If the limit assumption does not hold and there exists an infinite chain of ever closer traces π0 ∈ C, the condition requires that for all these π0 there is a closer π2 that avoids the effect, even in infinity: No matter how far we descend on this chain, we are always guaranteed that we can descend further towards a closer counterfactual trace that does not satisfy the effect. 
Example 2. To illustrate these conditions with a concrete example, consider the system from Figure 1, the trace π = {x, e}ω, the effect E = L( e), and the cause C = L( x), with similarity relation ≤subset. It is easy to that SAT is satisfied, as the system is deterministic and π|I = {x}ω ∈ C and π ∈ E. There is, as discussed in Section 3.2, an infinite chain in (L( ¬x), ≤subset 
π) and, 
hence, no closest trace. We require for all π0 ∈ L( ¬x) = C a π1 ∈ C with π1 ∈ L( ¬e) = E and a π2 =I π1 such that π2 ∈ E. In this case, we can pick π1 as π0 and π2 as the corresponding system trace, hence CF is satisfied. To see that MIN is satisfied, consider any strict subset C′ ⊂ C. Hence, there is some π′ ∈ C′ such that π′ ⊨ x. Then, all system traces π2 with π2 ≤π π′ satisfy π2 ⊨ x by the definition of ≤subset 
π, and in this system this also means 
π2 ⊨ e. Hence, C satisfies MIN because no strict subset satisfies CF. 
Remark 1. Note that Definition 2 is not restricted to similarity relations that can be expressed via zipped traces and LTL formulas as used in the previous examples, but instead applies to any comparative similarity relation as defined at the start of this section.
Synthesis of Temporal Causality 11 
4.3 Proving Generalization 
This section is dedicated to proving that our generalization (Definition 2) is conservative, i.e., agrees with Coenen et al.’s original definition whenever the underlying similarity relation satisfies the limit assumption and the actual trace is deterministic. First, we recall Coenen et al.’s definition. 
Definition 3 (Coenen et al. [19]). Let T be a system, π ∈ traces(T ) a trace, ≤π a similarity relation, and E ⊆ (2O)ω an effect property. C ⊆ (2I)ω is a cause of E on π in T if the following three conditions hold. 
PC1: π|I ∈ C and π ∈ E. 
PC2: For all closest counterfactual traces π0 ∈ C, i.e., traces for which there are no closer traces π1 ∈ C with π1 <π π0, there exists a π2 ∈ traces(T ) such that π0 =I π2 and π2 ∈ E. 
PC3: There is no C′ ⊂ C such that C′satisfies PC1 and PC2. 
Unlike in our updated definition, PC1 only works if the actual trace π is deterministic. If the π is nondeterministic, the effect can be avoided with no modifications at all to π (which is minimal), hence the cause should be empty. PC1 does not reflect this and allows to build a cause that includes π|I (and pos sibly more), wrongfully implying that a modification of the sequence is required to avoid the effect. PC2 may be vacuously satisfied if the similarity relation does not satisfy the limit assumption, as outlined in Section 3.2. 
Remark 2. Note that Coenen et al. consider traces π ∈ traces(CTπ) of the coun terfactual automaton CTπfor PC2. This automaton models contingencies, which allow to partially reset outputs back to as they were on the actual trace π, and to change the system state accordingly. For PC2 in Definition 3, this means that the closest counterfactual traces π2 do not have to avoid the effect themselves, but together with some contingency. This mechanism, inspired by Halpern’s mod ified version of actual causality [28], was extended by Coenen et al. [18,19] to lasso-shaped traces and finite state machines to sometimes obtain more accu rate causes. However, to guarantee meaningful results, the original system has to have unique output labels. Beutner et al.’s implementation [11] therefore al lows to toggle the usage of contingencies. Similarly, our generalization works both with contingencies and without. For the latter case, one simply supplants T with CTπin both definitions. Our cause synthesis algorithm can also handle contingencies, and our implementation allows to toggle them as a feature. Our theoretical contribution is independent of this detail. For completeness, we pro vide the definition of CTπ as defined by Coenen et al. [19] in Appendix A.1. 
We now proceed to show the equivalence between our definition (Defini tion 2) and Coenen et al.’s definition (Definition 3) in case the limit assumption is fulfilled and the actual trace is deterministic. We start with proving the equiv alence of the counterfactual conditions CF and PC2, which holds regardless of nondeterminism on the actual trace.
12 Finkbeiner et al. 
Lemma 1. Let T be a system, π ∈ traces(T ) a trace, C ⊆ (2I)ω a cause prop erty, and E ⊆ (2AP )ω an effect property. Let ≤ be a similarity relation that satisfies the limit assumption. Then we have that PC2 is satisfied iff CF is satisfied. 
The full proof of Lemma 1 and of Theorem 1 below, appear in Appendix A.2. With Lemma 1 at hand, we only need to address the differences between PC1 and SAT. It is easy to see that their equivalence fails when behavior on the actual trace π is nondeterministic, i.e., when there is another trace that is input equivalent to π but does not satisfy the effect. In such a case, PC1 is satisfied but SAT is not. Hence, our definition is equivalent to Coenen et al.’s definition only in deterministic systems, as we deliberately diverge in the case of nonde terminism on the actual trace. Notably, Lemma 1 holds for both deterministic and nondeterministic systems, and determinism is only relevant on the actual trace. The restriction to output-only effects E ⊆ (2O)ω is inherited from Coenen et al.’s definition, but technically not necessary. 
Theorem 1. Let ≤ be a similarity relation that satisfies the limit assumption. Then C ⊆ (2I)ω is a cause for E ⊆ (2O)ω on a trace π that is deterministic in T according to our definition (Definition 2) if and only if it is a cause according to Coenen et al.’s definition (Definition 3). 
5 Cause Synthesis 
In this section, we develop our algorithm for synthesizing causes. In Section 5.1 we formalize the characterization of a cause as the complement of the upper closure of the negated effect, which we have discussed intuitively in Section 3.1. In Section 5.2 we provide an algorithm for cause synthesis in the ω-regular setting, when the effect is given as a nondeterministic B¨uchi automaton and the actual trace is in a lasso shape. 
5.1 Proving Our Characterization 
For this section, we fix a system T , an actual trace π ∈ traces(T ), a similarity relation ≤, and an effect E. We now show that, if it exists, the cause for E on π is the complement of the upward closure of E in (traces(T ), ≤π). Formally, we construct a set D that is a cause for E on π via its complement: 
D = { ρ ∈ (2I)ω| ∃σ ∈ traces(T ). σ ≤π ρ ∧ σ ∈ E } , hence 
D = { ρ ∈ (2I)ω| ∀σ ∈ traces(T ). σ ≤π ρ → σ ∈ E } . 
The set D directly corresponds to the (unique) cause if there exists one, and is empty if there is none. We establish this in a series of lemmas, see Appendix A.2 for their full proofs. 
Lemma 2. If the set D is non-empty, it is a cause for E on π in T .
Synthesis of Temporal Causality 13 
The proof of Lemma 2 shows that D satisfies Definition 2 assuming it is non empty. The assumption is only required for SAT, as this criterion requires that π and all input-equivalent traces are in the cause. CF follows from the definition of D, and for MIN we can show that any strict subset of D does not satisfy CF. 
Lemma 3. Iff the set D is empty, there exists no cause that satisfies SAT. 
Lemma 3 serves two purposes. First, it helps us argue for the completeness of our construction. Second, it shows that the only reason why there may be no cause is due to a nondeterministic actual trace. To fully argue completeness, we show that causes are unique, and hence D is the only relevant cause in all cases. 
Lemma 4. Causes are (semantically) unique: There can be no two sets C ̸= C′ that are both causes for some effect property E on a trace π in some system T . 
Remark 3. This does not mean that there can only exist a single causal event, such as “a at position 0” or “b at position 1”, in a given scenario. Instead, Lemma 4 states that the semantics of the symbolic description of the causal behavior in a given scenario is unique. It is precisely the idea of temporal causal ity to encompass multiple single events in a single symbolic description, e.g., through a conjunction such as a ∧ b. 
5.2 Cause-Synthesis Algorithm for ω-Regular Effects 
In Section 5.1, we have established a direct characterization of causes as down ward closed sets, independent of any concrete descriptions of cause, effect, and trace. In this section, we develop an automata-based algorithm for synthesiz ing causes of ω-regular effects given, e.g., by a nondeterministic B¨uchi automa ton (NBA), on lasso-shaped traces. We assume that the relation ≤ ⊆ (2I)ω × (2I)ω×(2I)ω is definable by a relational ω-regular property P≤ ⊆ (2I×{t0,t1,t2})ω, such that (π0, π1, π2) ∈ ≤ iff the zipped trace zip(π0, π1, π2) satisfies P≤. Note that this applies to all concrete similarity relations introduced in Section 4. We show that under these assumptions, the set D from Section 5.1 can be constructed as an NBA. First, we construct an NBA for D and subsequently complement it. This is necessary because we start out from an NBA representation for the ef fect, and assume the similarity relation to be given by an NBA as well. Since the NBAs acceptance condition is existential, we need the additional complementa tions to express the universal quantification over the closer traces σ appearing in the definition of D. 
The main technical difficulty that remains is to ensure that the conditions on the three traces πactual , πclose and πfar , as they appear in the alphabet of a similarity relation, are applied consistently, and that the quantification over σ in D, which corresponds to πclose , is resolved at the correct step, as the automaton should range over the inputs I and not, e.g., over I × {t0, t1, t2} as used by the similarity relation.
14 Finkbeiner et al. 
Similarity Relation. Our starting point is the NBA for the similarity relation de fined by the ω-regular property P≤: AI≤ = (Q≤, 2I×{t0,t1,t2}, Q0≤, F≤, ∆I≤). The automaton AI≤ only reasons about inputs and uses tuples with the trace vari ables t0, t1 and t2 to encode whether the input appears on the actual, closer or farther trace, respectively. We lift the automaton to the full set of atomic propo sitions as the automaton A≤ = (Q≤, 2(I×{t0,t1,t2})∪(O×{t0,t1}), Q0≤, F≤, ∆≤). The transition relation is defined as follows, for a letter w: q2 ∈ ∆≤(q1, w) iff q2 ∈ 
∆I≤q1, w \ (O × {t0, t1}) . Hence, A≤ specifies the same relation between the inputs of the three traces as AI≤, but allows arbitrary output behavior. Its alpha bet does not contain outputs for π2, as these traces eventually form the elements of the cause, which only ranges over the inputs. 
Effect. Next, we modify the NBA A∗E = (QE, 2AP , qE, FE, ∆∗E) for the ω-regular effect E such that it refers to the closer trace t1 and ranges over the same alphabet as A≤. We obtain AE = (QE, 2(I×{t0,t1,t2})∪(O×{t0,t1}), qE, FE, ∆E) with: q2 ∈ ∆Eq1,(w × {t1}) ∪ X ∪ Y iff 
q2 ∈ ∆∗E(q1, w) ∧ X ⊆ (AP × {t0}) ∧ Y ⊆ (I × {t2}) . 
Hence, AE restricts π1 to be in E by restricting it to the transition relation of A∗E, while allowing an arbitrary trace π0 and arbitrary input sequence in π2. 
Intersection. For the conjunction that defines the set D, we intersect A≤ with the complement of AE to obtain A∩ = (Q∩, 2(I×{t0,t1,t2})∪(O×{t0,t1}), Q0∩, F∩, ∆∩) such that: A∩ = A≤ ∩ AE. 
System Product. As the next step, we construct the product of the automaton A∩ with the system T = (S, s0, AP, δ, l), ensuring that the atomic propositions t1 are picked from a valid system trace. When building the product, we project away explicit atomic propositions paired with t1, as the traces of the desired set D are only the traces paired with t2. The resulting automaton is A× = (S ×Q∩, 2(I×{t0,t2})∪(O×{t0}), {s0} × Q0∩, S × F∩, ∆×), where 
∆×(si, qi), w = (si+1, qi+1) | ∃A ⊆ I. si+1 ∈ δ(si, A) ∧ 
qi+1 ∈ ∆∩qi,((l(si+1) ∪ A) × {t1}) ∪ w   . 
Cause Automaton. To obtain the final result, we first complement the automaton from the previous step to obtain A× = (Q×, 2(I×{t0,t2})∪(O×{t0}), Q0×, F×, ∆×), and then build the product with the trace. At the same step we project away atomic propositions paired with t0, and remove the trace variable t2 to obtain the alphabet 2Ifor the cause. For the lasso-shaped trace π = π0 . . . πj−1 ·(πj . . . πk)ω we define the set of positions as Π = {0, . . . , k} and a successor function succ : Π 7→ Π as succ(r) = r + 1 for r < k, and succ(k) = j. The cause automaton is then AD = (Π × Q×, 2I, {π0} × Q0×, Π × F×, ∆D), where 
∆D(i, qi), w = (succ(i), qi+1) | qi+1 ∈ ∆×qi,(πi × {t0}) ∪ (w × {t2})   .
Synthesis of Temporal Causality 15 
From the lemmas established in Section 5.1, we conclude that there is a cause iff AD is non-empty, and then the cause is uniquely determined by its language. 
Corollary 1. The language of AD is empty iff there is no cause C for E on π in T , and if L(AD) is non-empty, then it is the unique cause for E on π in T . 
We can also state an upper bound on the size of AD, which is dominated by the potentially exponential growth from NBA complementation [46]. 
Proposition 3. If the effect E and the similarity relation ≤ are given as NBAs AE and A≤, respectively, then the size of AD is in |π| · 2Oe(2Oe(|AE|)·|A≤|·|T |). 
Note that the doubly-exponential upper bound in the description of E per sists independent of whether it is given as an NBA or LTL formula. In the latter case, we simply translate the negated formula, which again leads to an expo nential blow-up. In theory, the description does make a difference for ≤: If it is represented as a formula, we first need to translate it with a potentially expo nential increase in size, hence it would move up one exponent in the bound. In practice, the canonical similarity relation ≤subset can always be represented by a 1-state NBA, such that its contribution to the bound is less relevant. 
While the stated upper bound may seem daunting, it mirrors the (tight) bounds of related problems, such as LTL synthesis [44]. In the following section, we show that, not only can our approach solve many cause-synthesis problems in practice, it also significantly improves upon previous methods for cause checking. 
6 Implementation and Evaluation 
In this section, we evaluate a prototype tool implementing our cause-synthesis approach, called CORP - Causes for Omega-Regular Properties.4 Our prototype is written in Python and uses Spot [21] for automata operations and manipula tion. The prototype allows for both cause synthesis and cause checking, where in the latter case the correct cause is first synthesized and than checked for equiv alence against the cause candidate. This allows for a direct comparison with the cause checking tool CATS [11] in Section 6.2. Before, we report on our experi ments on cause synthesis, where we compare our method with the incomplete, sketch-based approach of CATS. All experiments were carried out on a machine equipped with a 2.8 GHz Intel Xeon processor and 64GB of memory, running Ubuntu 22.04. 
6.1 Cause Synthesis 
We conducted three different experiments that highlight how the similarity rela tions, effect size and system size contribute to the performance of our algorithm. 4 Our prototype is on GitHub: https://github.com/reactive-systems/corp. Our full 
evaluation can be reproduced with the artifact on Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/ zenodo.10946309.
16 Finkbeiner et al. 
Table 1: Cause synthesis for arbiters. |T | is the number of system states. In all instances, π is the (unique) trace where all n clients send a request at every position, which has length |π| = n. φE is the effect. We report the time taken to synthesize the causal NBA with the metrics ≤full and ≤subset in seconds and the respective NBA sizes |Afull 
C| and |Asubset 
C|, and provide an LTL description φC of 
the NBA language (guessed manually). TO denotes the timeout of 60 seconds. Instance |T | φE t(≤full ) t(≤subset ) |Afull 
C| |Asubset 
C | φC 
Spurious 1 1 g0 0.11 0.11 1 1 true Spurious 2 2 g0 0.11 0.11 1 1 true Spurious 3 3 g0 0.21 0.11 1 1 true Spurious 4 4 g0 TO 0.11 - 1 true 
Unfair 2 2 ¬g0 0.11 0.11 1 1 rprio Unfair 3 4 ¬g0 0.16 0.11 1 1 rprio Unfair 4 6 ¬g0 TO 0.11 - 1 rprio 
Full 1 1g0g00.11 0.11 
Full 2 4g0g00.11 0.11 
Full 3 11 g0g00.16 2.04 
Full 4 46 g0g0TO TO 
0.11 0.11 
0.11 0.11 
0.11 0.16 
0.11 33.22 
2 
2 
2 
12 
2 
215 
- 
- 
2 
2 
2 
4 
2 
24 
2 
214 
r0 
r0 
r0 
r0 
r0 
r0 
r0 
r0 
Arbiters. We computed causes on traces of resource arbiters to compare the performance of our algorithm under different similarity relations, whose logical description scales in the number of system inputs. An arbiter instance is param eterized by a number of clients n, each with its own input. This let us easily scale the size of the similarity relation’s description. For some number n of clients (in dexed by k) that request access to a shared resource with a request rk, an arbiter grants mutually exclusive access to the resource with a grant gk. We considered different arbiter strategies, and for each we synthesize causes as NBAs Afull 
Cand 
C with the similarity relations ≤full and ≤subset, respectively. The results of 
Asubset 
these instances are depicted in Table 1. Spurious arbiters simply give out grants to all clients in a round-robin manner, regardless of previous requests. Unfair ar biters prioritize one client with request rprio over the others, while full arbiters are fully functional arbiters that only give out grants that were requested be forehand. In all instances, we computed causes on the (unique) trace π where all clients send requests continuously, i.e., π|I = {r0, . . . , rn}ω. Consequently, on this trace both the spurious and the full arbiter send grants to all clients, while the
Synthesis of Temporal Causality 17 
unfair arbiter only gives grants to the prioritized client. These varying strategies are reflected in the synthesized cause-effect pairs. In the spurious arbiters, the language of the synthesized cause NBA for the effect g0 is true, which reflects that the effect appears on all system traces. In the unfair arbiters, the cause for no grant being given to client 0 is that the prioritized arbiter sends requests permanently, i.e., the causal NBA has the language rprio. In the full arbiters, 
g0 is caused, as expected, by r0 and g0 is caused by r0. From a performance standpoint, the arbiter instances show us that accommodating the canonical similarity relation ≤subset, as we did through our generalization of temporal causality in Section 4, leads to significant improvements in practice: In all instances, synthesizing causes with ≤subset was faster than with ≤full , and the resulting causal NBAs were smaller as well. This is mostly because of the num ber of inputs involved: The other parameters stay comparably small when going from the spurious 1-arbiter to the spurious 4-arbiter, but the latter times out when using ≤full . When the systems get larger and the effects more complex, e.g., in the instance of the full 4-arbiter with the effect g0, the automata produced can become bigger even with ≤subset. However, the language of the produced automata has a small representation, i.e., r0, such that we see potential for improvement through automata minimization techniques. 
Neural Synthesis. For more di 
verse effects, we considered mispre dicted circuits from a neural syn thesis model [47]. Given some spec ification (in this case, generated by Spot’s randltl) the neural model predicts an implementation as an AIGER [12] circuit, which is in the end model-checked against the spec 
Time (s) 
102 101 100 
9 
8 
7 
System Size 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
ification. Since neural synthesis is not sound, this check fails occasionally and returns a counterexample, which 
101 
20 40 60 80 100 Effect Size 
1 
may be used for further repair [20]. We used our tool CORP to compute the cause for the violation of the speci fication on such a counterexample. In Figure 3 we report the time of com puting causes with respect to size of 
Fig. 3: Computing causes for neural synthesis mispredictions with CORP. Size of a point represents the length of the counterexample (between 2 and 16). 
the syntax tree of the effect formula, and the system size. The timeout was set to 100 seconds. The size of the points in the scatter plot corresponds to the length of the counterexample and the color to the system size. From the plot we can deduce that a large effect does not per-se mean a long runtime of our tool. How ever, a combination of large effects, bigger systems, and longer counterexamples usually means that the tool takes longer. The sizes of the synthesized causes are diverse and range from 2 to 60 states.
18 Finkbeiner et al. 
{} 
i0 
{o4} 
¬i0 ⊤ 
φE = ¬(i2 U i0) ↔ ( o4) (Effect) 
π = {i2}{}{i0, o4}({i2, o4})ω(Actual trace) C :¬i0 ¬i0 ∧ ¬i2 i0⊤ Asubset 
(a) Faulty system. 
(b) Effect φE, actual trace π and cause automaton Asubset C . 
Fig. 4: A system predicted wrongly by a neural synthesis model (Figure 4a) for the specification ¬φE, i.e., the negation of the effect. The effect is shown together with the actual trace π, i.e., a counterexample obtained from model checking, and the computed cause automaton Asubset 
Cin Figure 4b. 
Example 3. We discuss an illustrative example of cause synthesis with a small benchmark from the neural synthesis datatset. All relevant inputs and outputs of our cause synthesis algorithm are depicted in Figure 4. First, we have the system (cf. Figure 4a), which is a wrongly predicted circuit of the neural syn thesis model. This model tried to come up with a solution for the specification (i2 U i0) ↔ ( o4), i.e., o4 appears infinitely often if and only if input i2 is enabled until input i0 is enabled. The predicted system does not satisfy this specification, because there are cases where o4 holds without the inputs meeting the required condition. Hence, model checking the specification returns a counterexample π that violates the formula, which means the negated spec ification can be seen as an effect φE that is present on the counterexample π (cf. Figure 4b). Our algorithm then computes the cause for this effect, i.e., for the violation of the specification, on the counterexample π, as a nondeterministic B¨uchi automaton. The computed automaton Asubset 
Cis depicted at the bottom of 
Figure 4b. It is language-equivalent to the LTL formula ¬i0∧ (¬i0∧¬i2∧ i0), which basically states that the effect is caused by a conjunction of four inputs spread out over the first three steps. Indeed, it is easy to see that modifying any of these four inputs results in a trace that satisfies the specification: For instance, setting i0 at the first position results in the trace that immediately enters the state labeled with o4 and loops there forever such that the left part of the equivalence is satisfied, while removing i0 from the third position results in looping in the initial state such that the right part of the equivalence is not satisfied anymore. 
Comparison with Cause Sketching. CATS, the tool of Beutner et al. [11], allows to enumerate non-temporal formulas in holes of a provided cause sketch until a cause is found. If the effect contains as the only temporal operator and a cause exists, there is a sketch that is guaranteed to encompass the cause. This provides us with a baseline with which we can compare our cause-synthesis algorithm. We constructed random benchmarks that fall into CATS’ complete
Synthesis of Temporal Causality 19 
Fig. 5: Direct comparisons between our tool CORP and the tool CATS [11]. Figure 5a shows the time CATS needs to synthesize a cause in its complete fragment with trace and effect of size 2, and the time taken by CORP for sizes 2 and 10. Table 5b shows the time taken to check single causal relationships. These problems are taken from Beutner et al. [11] (where “Instances” are “Examples”). 
101 
Time (s) 
100 
101 
(a) Cause synthesis. 
CORP-10 
CORP-2 
CATS-2 
0 200 400 600 800 System Size 
(b) Cause checking. 
Instance CATS CORP 
Spurious Arbiter 0.72 0.11 Simple Arbiter 0.97 0.11 Arbiter 22.84 0.11 Instance 6, odd 1.81 0.11 Instance 8 0.92 0.11 TP Right 0.87 0.11 
fragment using Spot’s randaut function to generate systems with 10 up to 1000 states, obtaining traces of length 2 and then inserting a new atomic proposition e at the last position of the trace and in the system. The effect then is defined as the occurrence of e at exactly this position. We chose such small traces and effects because CATS timed out already on slightly larger instances. We conducted additional experiments using just our tool CORP with traces (and effects) of size 10. Figure 5a shows the time taken by CATS and CORP to synthesize causes. The influence of the system size on the runtime of CORP in this setting is negligible, which we believe is due to the efficient automata operations performed by Spot. The hyperproperty encoding of CATS does not seem as amenable to similar optimizations. 
6.2 Cause Checking 
It is straightforward to use our cause synthesis algorithm to also check causes through an equivalence check between the synthesized causal NBA and the can didate formula (or automaton). This allows a direct performance comparison with the cause checking tool CATS of Beutner et al. [11], which we conducted on the publicly available benchmarks of their paper. In these cause-checking benchmarks, a cause candidate is given in addition to the system, actual trace and effect. The time CATS and our tool CORP took in each instance to check whether the given candidate is a cause is depicted in Figure 5b. Somewhat sur prisingly, our cause checker based on cause synthesis performs significantly better on all benchmarks. This shows that our characterization of causes as comple ments of the upward closure of the negated effect (cf. Section 5.1) is more efficient than encoding the cause-checking instances into a hyperlogic, as done by CATS.
20 Finkbeiner et al. 
7 Related Work 
The study of causality and its applications in formal methods has gained great interest in recent years [3]. In a finite setting, Ibrahim et al. use SAT solvers and linear programming to check [34] and infer [33] actual causes. Our definition of actual causality for reactive systems extends the definitions of Coenen et al. [19] to cases in which the limit assumption does not hold. While Coenen et al. study the theory of actual causality [28] in reactive systems, they do not provide a way to generate causes and explanations. In terms of cause synthesis, the most related work is by Beutner et al. [11], which checks causality and generates causes based on sketching. Unlike ours, their tool is only applicable for the small fragment of LTL containing only operators, while we are able to generate temporal causes for all ω-regular specifications. 
In a series of works, Leue et al. study symbolic description of counterfactual causes in Event Order Logic [14,37,38]. However, this logic can only reason about the ordering of events, and not their absolute timing, as we can do with ω-regular properties (e.g., specifying that the input at the second position is the cause). 
G¨ossler and M´etayer [23] define causality for component-based systems, and G¨ossler and Stefani [24] study causality based on counterfactual builders. Their formalisms differ from ours, which is based on Coenen et al. [19], and none of the works considers cause synthesis. 
Most other works related to cause synthesis concern generating explanations for effects observed on finite traces [5,25,26,48], or effects restricted to safety properties [42]. In the context of cause synthesis over infinite traces for effects given as temporal specifications, existing works are limited to causes given as sets of events (i.e., atomic propositions and times points) [7,18,31] or take a state-centric view to, e.g., measure the responsibility of a state for an observed effect property [1,4,41]. 
8 Conclusion 
This paper presents the first complete algorithm to compute temporal causes for arbitrary ω-regular properties. It is based on a new, generalized version of temporal causality that solves a central dilemma of previous definitions by loos ening the assumptions on similarity relations. From a philosophical perspective, this is an immense step forward since it is the first definition that accommodates the canonical similarity relation used in previous literature. Our experimental results show that our generalization also leads to significant improvements from a practical perspective. These mainly stem from characterizing causes based on set-closure properties, which may be an interesting approach for counterfactual causality in other formalisms. Besides, our work opens up exciting research di rections on generating explanations from temporal causes, i.e., as formulas or annotations in highlighted counterexamples.
Synthesis of Temporal Causality 21 
Acknowledgements. We thank Matthias Cosler and Frederik Schmitt for pro viding us with the neural synthesis benchmarks. This work was partially sup ported by the DFG in project 389792660 (Center for Perspicuous Systems, TRR 248) and by the ERC Grant HYPER (No. 101055412). 
References 
1. Baier, C., van den Bossche, R., Kl¨uppelholz, S., Lehmann, J., Piribauer, J.: Backward responsibility in transition systems using general power in dices. In: Wooldridge, M.J., Dy, J.G., Natarajan, S. (eds.) Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2024, Thirty-Sixth Confer ence on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2024, Four teenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2014, February 20-27, 2024, Vancouver, Canada. pp. 20320–20327. AAAI Press (2024). https://doi.org/10.1609/AAAI.V38I18.30013, https://doi.org/10. 1609/aaai.v38i18.30013 
2. Baier, C., Coenen, N., Finkbeiner, B., Funke, F., Jantsch, S., Siber, J.: Causality-based game solving. In: Silva, A., Leino, K.R.M. (eds.) Computer Aided Verification - 33rd International Conference, CAV 2021, Virtual Event, July 20-23, 2021, Proceedings, Part I. LNCS, vol. 12759, pp. 894–917. Springer (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-81685-8 42, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-030-81685-8 42 
3. Baier, C., Dubslaff, C., Funke, F., Jantsch, S., Majumdar, R., Piribauer, J., Ziemek, R.: From Verification to Causality-Based Explications. In: Bansal, N., Merelli, E., Worrell, J. (eds.) 48th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2021). Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), vol. 198, pp. 1:1–1:20. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ur Informatik, Dagstuhl, Germany (2021), https://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2021/14070 
4. Baier, C., Dubslaff, C., Funke, F., Jantsch, S., Piribauer, J., Ziemek, R.: Op erational causality - necessarily sufficient and sufficiently necessary. In: Jansen, N., Stoelinga, M., van den Bos, P. (eds.) A Journey from Process Algebra via Timed Automata to Model Learning - Essays Dedicated to Frits Vaandrager on the Occasion of His 60th Birthday. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 13560, pp. 27–45. Springer (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15629-8 2, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-15629-8 2 
5. Ball, T., Naik, M., Rajamani, S.K.: From symptom to cause: localizing errors in counterexample traces. In: Aiken, A., Morrisett, G. (eds.) Conference Record of POPL 2003: The 30th SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Pro gramming Languages, New Orleans, Louisisana, USA, January 15-17, 2003. pp. 97–105. ACM (2003). https://doi.org/10.1145/604131.604140, https://doi.org/10. 1145/604131.604140 
6. Baumeister, J., Coenen, N., Bonakdarpour, B., Finkbeiner, B., S´anchez, C.: A temporal logic for asynchronous hyperproperties. In: International Conference on Computer Aided Verification, CAV 2021. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 12759. Springer (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-81685-8 33 
7. Beer, I., Ben-David, S., Chockler, H., Orni, A., Trefler, R.J.: Explaining coun terexamples using causality. In: Bouajjani, A., Maler, O. (eds.) Computer Aided Verification, 21st International Conference, CAV 2009, Grenoble, France, June 26 - July 2, 2009. Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5643,
22 Finkbeiner et al. 
pp. 94–108. Springer (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-02658-4 11, https: //doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-02658-4 11 
8. Beutner, R., Finkbeiner, B.: HyperATL∗: A logic for hyperproperties in multi-agent systems. Log. Methods Comput. Sci. (2023) 
9. Beutner, R., Finkbeiner, B.: Model checking omega-regular hyperproperties with autohyperq. In: Piskac, R., Voronkov, A. (eds.) LPAR 2023: Proceedings of 24th International Conference on Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning, Manizales, Colombia, 4-9th June 2023. EPiC Series in Computing, vol. 94, pp. 23–35. EasyChair (2023). https://doi.org/10.29007/1XJT, https://doi. org/10.29007/1xjt 
10. Beutner, R., Finkbeiner, B., Frenkel, H., Metzger, N.: Second-order hyperprop erties. In: Enea, C., Lal, A. (eds.) Computer Aided Verification - 35th In ternational Conference, CAV 2023, Paris, France, July 17-22, 2023, Proceed ings, Part II. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 13965, pp. 309–332. Springer (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-37703-7 15, https://doi.org/ 10.1007/978-3-031-37703-7 15 
11. Beutner, R., Finkbeiner, B., Frenkel, H., Siber, J.: Checking and sketching causes on temporal sequences. In: Andr´e, E., Sun, J. (eds.) Automated Technology for ´ Verification and Analysis - 21st International Symposium, ATVA 2023, Singapore, October 24-27, 2023, Proceedings, Part II. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 14216, pp. 314–327. Springer (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45332-8 - 18, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-45332-8 18 
12. Biere, A.: The AIGER And-Inverter Graph (AIG) format version 20071012. Tech. Rep. 07/1, Inst. f. Form. Model. u. Verifikation, Johannes Kepler University (2007) 13. Buechi, J.R.: On a decision method in restricted second-order arithmetic. In: In 
ternational Congress on Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science (1962) 14. Caltais, G., Guetlein, S.L., Leue, S.: Causality for general LTL-definable prop erties. In: Workshop on formal reasoning about Causation, Responsibility, and Explanations in Science and Technology, CREST 2018. EPTCS, vol. 286 (2018). https://doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.286.1 
15. Chaki, S., Groce, A., Strichman, O.: Explaining abstract counterexamples. In: Taylor, R.N., Dwyer, M.B. (eds.) Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIG SOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering, 2004, Newport Beach, CA, USA, October 31 - November 6, 2004. pp. 73–82. ACM (2004). https://doi.org/10.1145/1029894.1029908, https://doi.org/10.1145/ 1029894.1029908 
16. Clarkson, M.R., Finkbeiner, B., Koleini, M., Micinski, K.K., Rabe, M.N., S´anchez, C.: Temporal logics for hyperproperties. In: Abadi, M., Kremer, S. (eds.) Principles of Security and Trust - Third International Conference, POST 2014, Grenoble, France, April 5-13, 2014, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Com puter Science, vol. 8414, pp. 265–284. Springer (2014), https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-642-54792-8 15 
17. Clarkson, M.R., Schneider, F.B.: Hyperproperties. J. Comput. Secur. 18(6), 1157– 1210 (2010), https://doi.org/10.3233/JCS-2009-0393 
18. Coenen, N., Dachselt, R., Finkbeiner, B., Frenkel, H., Hahn, C., Horak, T., Met zger, N., Siber, J.: Explaining hyperproperty violations. In: Shoham, S., Vizel, Y. (eds.) Computer Aided Verification - 34th International Conference, CAV 2022, Haifa, Israel, August 7-10, 2022, Proceedings, Part I. LNCS, vol. 13371, pp. 407– 429. Springer (2022), https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-13185-1 20
Synthesis of Temporal Causality 23 
19. Coenen, N., Finkbeiner, B., Frenkel, H., Hahn, C., Metzger, N., Siber, J.: Temporal causality in reactive systems. In: Bouajjani, A., Hol´ık, L., Wu, Z. (eds.) Automated Technology for Verification and Analysis - 20th International Symposium, ATVA 2022, Virtual Event, October 25-28, 2022, Proceedings. LNCS, vol. 13505, pp. 208–224. Springer (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19992-9 13, https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19992-9 13 
20. Cosler, M., Schmitt, F., Hahn, C., Finkbeiner, B.: Iterative circuit repair against formal specifications. In: The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Rep resentations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net (2023), https://openreview.net/pdf?id=SEcSahl0Ql 
21. Duret-Lutz, A., Renault, E., Colange, M., Renkin, F., Aisse, A.G., Schlehuber Caissier, P., Medioni, T., Martin, A., Dubois, J., Gillard, C., Lauko, H.: From spot 2.0 to spot 2.10: What’s new? In: Shoham, S., Vizel, Y. (eds.) Computer Aided Verification - 34th International Conference, CAV 2022, Haifa, Israel, August 7- 10, 2022, Proceedings, Part II. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 13372, pp. 174–187. Springer (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-13188-2 9, https: //doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-13188-2 9 
22. Finkbeiner, B., Siber, J.: Counterfactuals modulo temporal logics. In: Piskac, R., Voronkov, A. (eds.) LPAR 2023: Proceedings of 24th International Conference on Logic for Programming, Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning, Manizales, Colom bia, 4-9th June 2023. EPiC Series in Computing, vol. 94, pp. 181–204. EasyChair (2023). https://doi.org/10.29007/QTW7, https://doi.org/10.29007/qtw7 
23. G¨ossler, G., M´etayer, D.L.: A general trace-based framework of logical causal ity. In: International Symposium on Formal Aspects of Component Software, FACS 2013. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8348. Springer (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-07602-7 11 
24. G¨ossler, G., Stefani, J.: Causality analysis and fault ascription in component-based systems. Theor. Comput. Sci. 837 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcs.2020.06.010 
25. Groce, A., Chaki, S., Kroening, D., Strichman, O.: Error explanation with distance metrics. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 8(3) (2006). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10009-005-0202-0 
26. Groce, A., Kroening, D., Lerda, F.: Understanding counterexamples with ex plain. In: International Conference on Computer Aided Verification, CAV 2004. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3114. Springer (2004). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-27813-9 35 
27. Gutsfeld, J.O., M¨uller-Olm, M., Ohrem, C.: Propositional dynamic logic for hyperproperties. In: International Conference on Concurrency Theory, CONCUR 2020. LIPIcs, vol. 171. Schloss Dagstuhl (2020). https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.CONCUR.2020.50 
28. Halpern, J.Y.: A modification of the halpern-pearl definition of causality. In: Yang, Q., Wooldridge, M.J. (eds.) Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2015, Buenos Aires, Argentina, July 25-31, 2015. pp. 3022–3033. AAAI Press (2015), http://ijcai.org/Abstract/15/427 29. Halpern, J.Y.: Actual Causality. MIT Press (2016) 
30. Halpern, J.Y., Pearl, J.: Causes and explanations: A structural-model approach: Part 1: Causes. In: Breese, J.S., Koller, D. (eds.) UAI ’01: Proceedings of the 17th Conference in Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA, August 2-5, 2001. pp. 194–202. Morgan Kaufmann (2001)
24 Finkbeiner et al. 
31. Horak, T., Coenen, N., Metzger, N., Hahn, C., Flemisch, T., M´endez, J., Dimov, D., Finkbeiner, B., Dachselt, R.: Visual analysis of hyperproperties for under standing model checking results. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 28(1) (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2021.3114866 
32. Hume, D.: An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. London (1748) 33. Ibrahim, A., Pretschner, A.: From checking to inference: Actual causal ity computations as optimization problems. In: Hung, D.V., Sokolsky, O. (eds.) Automated Technology for Verification and Analysis - 18th Interna tional Symposium, ATVA 2020, Hanoi, Vietnam, October 19-23, 2020, Proceed ings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 12302, pp. 343–359. Springer (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-59152-6 19, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-030-59152-6 19 
34. Ibrahim, A., Rehwald, S., Pretschner, A.: Efficiently checking actual causality with sat solving. Engineering Secure and Dependable Software Systems 53, 241–255 (2019) 
35. Kupriyanov, A., Finkbeiner, B.: Causality-based verification of multi-threaded programs. In: D’Argenio, P.R., Melgratti, H.C. (eds.) CONCUR 2013 - Concur rency Theory - 24th International Conference, CONCUR 2013, Buenos Aires, Ar gentina, August 27-30, 2013. Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8052, pp. 257–272. Springer (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-40184- 8 19, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-40184-8 19 
36. Kupriyanov, A., Finkbeiner, B.: Causal termination of multi-threaded programs. In: Biere, A., Bloem, R. (eds.) Computer Aided Verification - 26th International Conference, CAV 2014, Held as Part of the Vienna Summer of Logic, VSL 2014, Vi enna, Austria, July 18-22, 2014. Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8559, pp. 814–830. Springer (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08867- 9 54, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08867-9 54 
37. Leitner-Fischer, F., Leue, S.: Causality checking for complex system models. In: Giacobazzi, R., Berdine, J., Mastroeni, I. (eds.) Verification, Model Check ing, and Abstract Interpretation, 14th International Conference, VMCAI 2013, Rome, Italy, January 20-22, 2013. Proceedings. LNCS, vol. 7737, pp. 248–267. Springer (2013). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35873-9 16, https://doi.org/ 10.1007/978-3-642-35873-9 16 
38. Leitner-Fischer, F., Leue, S.: SpinCause: a tool for causality checking. In: Inter national Symposium on Model Checking of Software, SPIN 2014. ACM (2014). https://doi.org/10.1145/2632362.2632371 
39. Lewis, D.K.: Causation. Journal of Philosophy 70(17), 556–567 (1973). https://doi.org/10.2307/2025310 
40. Lewis, D.K.: Counterfactuals. Cambridge, MA, USA: Blackwell (1973) 41. Mascle, C., Baier, C., Funke, F., Jantsch, S., Kiefer, S.: Responsibility and veri fication: Importance value in temporal logics. In: 36th Annual ACM/IEEE Sym posium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2021, Rome, Italy, June 29 - July 2, 2021. pp. 1–14. IEEE (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/LICS52264.2021.9470597, https://doi.org/10.1109/LICS52264.2021.9470597 
42. Parreaux, J., Piribauer, J., Baier, C.: Counterfactual causality for reachability and safety based on distance functions. In: Achilleos, A., Monica, D.D. (eds.) Proceed ings of the Fourteenth International Symposium on Games, Automata, Logics, and Formal Verification, GandALF 2023, Udine, Italy, 18-20th September 2023. EPTCS, vol. 390, pp. 132–149 (2023). https://doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.390.9, https://doi.org/10.4204/EPTCS.390.9
Synthesis of Temporal Causality 25 
43. Pnueli, A.: The temporal logic of programs. In: 18th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, Providence, Rhode Island, USA, 31 October - 1 November 1977. pp. 46–57. IEEE Computer Society (1977). https://doi.org/10.1109/SFCS.1977.32, https://doi.org/10.1109/SFCS.1977.32 
44. Pnueli, A., Rosner, R.: On the synthesis of a reactive module. In: Conference Record of the Sixteenth Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Lan guages, Austin, Texas, USA, January 11-13, 1989. pp. 179–190. ACM Press (1989). https://doi.org/10.1145/75277.75293, https://doi.org/10.1145/75277.75293 
45. Sallinger, S., Weissenbacher, G., Zuleger, F.: A formalization of heisenbugs and their causes. In: Ferreira, C., Willemse, T.A.C. (eds.) Software Engineering and Formal Methods - 21st International Conference, SEFM 2023, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, November 6-10, 2023, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Sci ence, vol. 14323, pp. 282–300. Springer (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031- 47115-5 16, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-47115-5 16 
46. Schewe, S.: B¨uchi complementation made tight. In: Albers, S., Marion, J. (eds.) 26th International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, STACS 2009, February 26-28, 2009, Freiburg, Germany, Proceedings. LIPIcs, vol. 3, pp. 661–672. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ur Informatik, Ger many (2009). https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPICS.STACS.2009.1854, https://doi.org/ 10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2009.1854 
47. Schmitt, F., Hahn, C., Rabe, M.N., Finkbeiner, B.: Neural circuit synthesis from specification patterns. In: Ranzato, M., Beygelzimer, A., Dauphin, Y.N., Liang, P., Vaughan, J.W. (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual. pp. 15408–15420 (2021), https://proceedings. neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/8230bea7d54bcdf99cdfe85cb07313d5-Abstract.html 
48. Wang, C., Yang, Z., Ivancic, F., Gupta, A.: Whodunit? causal analysis for coun terexamples. In: International Symposium on Automated Technology for Verifi cation and Analysis, ATVA 2006. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4218. Springer (2006). https://doi.org/10.1007/11901914 9 
A Appendix 
A.1 Additional Definitions 
Definition 4 (Counterfactual Automaton [19]). Let T = (S, s0, AP, δ, l) be a system and π = π0 . . . πi· (πj . . . πk)ω ∈ traces(T ) be a lasso-shaped trace. The counterfactual automaton for π and T is CTπ = (SC, sC0, IC ∪ O, δC, lC), where: 
– SC = S × {0 . . . k}, we have k copies of the original system; – sC0 = (s0, 0), paths start in the initial state of the first copy; – IC = I∪· {oC| o ∈ O}, additional inputs for setting an output as contingency; – (s′, n′) ∈ δC((s, n), Y ) iff the following holds: 
1. if n = k then n′ = j else n′ = n + 1, and 
2. there is some s′′ ∈ δ(s, Y |I ) such that for all oC ∈ Y : o ∈ l(s′) ↔ o ∈ πn and for all oC ̸∈ Y : o ∈ l(s′) ↔ o ∈ l(s′′); 
– lC((s, k)) = l(s), the labeling function is based on the original states.
26 Finkbeiner et al. 
A.2 Omitted Proofs 
Proposition 1. ≤subset does not satisfy the limit assumption. 
Proof. We generalize from the example of Coenen et al. [19]. Let I = {a} and consider the actual trace π = {a}ω and C = a. Let π1 be any trace in C = ¬a, consequently there exists some i such that for all j ≥ i : a ̸∈ π1[j]. Then we can construct a closer trace π2 with a ∈ π2[i] and π2[k] = π1[k] for all k ̸= i. Thus we have such a π2 ∈ C with π2 <π π1 for any π1 ∈ C, which means we cannot pick a π1 for any π0 ∈ C as required by the limit assumption. ⊓⊔ 
Proposition 2. ≤full satisfies the limit assumption. 
Proof. Assume there were C and π, with an infinite descending chain π0 >full 
π 
π. . . with πi ∈ C for all i . Since >full 
π1 >full 
πis based on >subset 
π and is irreflexive, 
we have that changes(πi, π) ⊃ changes(πi+1, π) for all i. Given A ⊆ AP and X ⊆ AP × N, we define X|A = X ∩ {(a, i) | a ∈ A ∧ i ∈ N}. For every i, let Fi ⊆ I be the largest set such that changes(πi, π)|Fiis finite, i.e., Fiis the sets of inputs on which πi and π differ on finitely many positions. We have that Fi ⊆ Fi+1 for all i, as the other case contradicts changes(πi, π) ⊃ changes(πi+1, π). Since I is finite, there can only be finitely many i with Fi ⊂ Fi+1. Let j = i + 1 for the largest such i, hence we have Fk = Fk+1 for all k ≥ j. From the additional criterion of <full 
πit follows that changes(πk, π)|I\Fk = changes(πk+1, π)|I\Fk+1 , hence we must have changes(πk, π)|Fk ⊃ changes(πk+1, π)|Fk+1 . Since changes(πk, π)|Fk is finite by construction, we can have only a finite number of such k’s, which yields a contradiction with our starting chain being infinite. ⊓⊔ 
Lemma 1. Let T be a system, π ∈ traces(T ) a trace, C ⊆ (2I)ω a cause prop erty, and E ⊆ (2AP )ω an effect property. Let ≤ be a similarity relation that satisfies the limit assumption. Then we have that PC2 is satisfied iff CF is satisfied. 
Proof. Since PC2 and CF first quantify universally over C, it is easy to see that they are both satisfied in the case where C = (2I)ω and C is, consequently, empty. We therefore in the following assume that C is non-empty. Since ≤ satisfies the limit assumption, we have a non-empty set of closest counterfactual traces Cπ = {ρ ∈ C | ∀σ ∈ C. σ ̸<π ρ}, i.e., all minimal elements in (C, <π). We write E(π1) if π1 has an input-equivalent trace avoiding the effect, i.e., E(π1) iff ∃π2 ∈ traces(T ). π2 =I π1 ∧ π2 ∈ E. We now prove the directions of the equivalence separately. 
“⇒” : Assume that PC2 is satisfied. Let π0 ∈ C be any trace not satisfying the cause. We know there is some π1 ∈ Cπ with π1 ≤π π0, as either π0 is a minimal element in (C, <π), or a closer trace is. From PC2 it then follows that E(π1), implying CF. 
“⇐” : Assume that CF is satisfied. Since Cπ ⊆ C, for all π0 ∈ Cπ there is a π1 ∈ C with π1 ≤π π0 such that E(π1). Since π0 is in Cπ, it holds that π1 = π0. Hence, we have E(π0) for all π0 ∈ Cπ. ⊓⊔
Synthesis of Temporal Causality 27 
Remark 4. As in Definitions 2 and 3 (cf. Remark 2), the system T in the proof of Lemma 1 could easily be replaced by CTπto search for a contingency trace that does not satisfy the effect, i.e., in the definition of E(ρ). Hence, Lemma 1 and Theorem 1 which we develop based upon it, hold regardless of whether contingencies are applied in the respective definitions. 
Theorem 1. Let ≤ be a similarity relation that satisfies the limit assumption. Then C ⊆ (2I)ω is a cause for E ⊆ (2O)ω on a trace π that is deterministic in T according to our definition (Definition 2) if and only if it is a cause according to Coenen et al.’s definition (Definition 3). 
Proof. With Lemma 1 at hand, we only need to show that SAT is satisfied in a scenario iff PC1 is satisfied, because MIN and PC3 state the same requirement. “⇒” : This direction is trivial, as π =I π. 
“⇐” : Since we assume π is deterministic in T , we have for all π0 ∈ traces(T ) that π0 =I π implies π0 = π. From PC1 we know π0|I ∈ C and π ∈ E. Hence, π0|I ∈ C and π0 ∈ E. ⊓⊔ 
Lemma 2. If the set D is non-empty, it is a cause for E on π in T . 
Proof. Assume D is non-empty. We show that it satisfies SAT, CF, and MIN of Definition 2. 
SAT: Consider π′ ∈ D. For all traces π0 that are input equivalent to the actual trace, i.e., π0 =I π, we have that π0 ≤π π′ by definition. Therefore, π0 ∈ E for all such π0. Any π1 ≤π π0 must have π1 =I π as π is the unique minimum of ≤π. It follows π1 ∈ E for all such π1, which means π0|I ∈ D for all π0 =I π. Hence, D satisfies SAT. 
CF: If D is empty, CF is trivially satisfied. So consider some π0 ∈ D. By the definition of D it follows that there is some σ ∈ traces(T ) with σ ≤π π0 and σ /∈ E. Then we can pick π1 = σ for the CF condition with π2 = π1, which implies π2 =I π1 and π2 ∈/ E. This shows that D satisfies CF. 
MIN: For contradiction, assume there was a D′ ⊂ D that satisfies SAT and CF. Then there is some π0 ∈ D′ such that π0 ∈ D \ D′. Since π0 ∈ D, for all π1 ∈ traces(T ) we have π1 ≤π π0 → π1 ∈ E. But since π0 ∈ D′ and D′satisfies CF, we have some π1 ≤π π0 and π2 =I π1, which together implies π2 ≤π π0, with π2 ∈/ E, a contradiction. ⊓⊔ 
Lemma 3. Iff the set D is empty, there exists no cause that satisfies SAT. 
Proof. “⇒” : We show that if D is empty, SAT can never be satisfied. In this case, we in particular have π|I ∈/ D, which means there is some σ ≤π π with σ /∈ E. Since π is the unique minimum of ≤π, we must have σ =I π. This means we have a spoiling π0 = σ with π0 ∈/ E for all possible candidates C ⊆ (2I)ω, so no cause exists. 
“⇐” : If SAT is not satisfied for any cause C, it is also not satisfied for C′ = {π|I }, i.e., the cause that contains only the input sequence of the actual trace π. Since for all π0 =I π we have π0 ∈ C′ by construction, there must exists some π0 =I π with π0 ∈/ E. For contradiction, assume that D was non-empty and there is
28 Finkbeiner et al. 
some σ ∈ D such that all σ0 ≤π σ satisfy σ0 ∈ E. Then, we have in particular π ≤π σ by the definition of a similarity relation, and with π0 =I π it follows that π0 ≤π σ. This yields a contradiction: since π0 ∈/ E but all σ0 ≤π σ satisfy σ0 ∈ E. 
Note that this scenario directly corresponds to nondeterminism on the actual trace. ⊓⊔ 
Lemma 4. Causes are (semantically) unique: There can be no two sets C ̸= C′ that are both causes for some effect property E on a trace π in some system T . 
Proof. By contradiction. Assume there were two distinct causes C ̸= C′for some effect property E on a trace π in some system T . We show that the intersection C ∩ C′ also satisfies SAT and CF, which contradicts C and C′satisfying MIN. 
SAT: From C satisfying SAT we know for all π0 =I π that π0 ∈ C and π0 ∈ E, from C′satisfying SAT we further know π0 ∈ C′, hence we have π0 ∈ C ∩ C′, such that C ∩ C′satisfies SAT. 
CF: Consider some π0 ∈ C ∩ C′, so either π0 ∈ C or π0 ∈ C′. If π0 ∈ C, we can pick π1 and π2 as in the CF condition of C, because π1 ∈ C implies π1 ∈ C ∩ C′. In the other case, we can pick π1 and π2 symmetrically as in the CF condition of C′to again obtain a π1 ∈ C ∩ C′. In both cases, we have π1 =I π2 and π2 ∈/ E, which shows that C ∩ C′satisfies CF. ⊓⊔ 
Proposition 3. If the effect E and the similarity relation ≤ are given as NBAs AE and A≤, respectively, then the size of AD is in |π| · 2Oe(2Oe(|AE|)·|A≤|·|T |). 
Proof. By construction, the size of A× is in 2Oe(|AE|)· |A≤| · |T |, since NBA com plementation of an automaton of size n leads to at most 2Oe(n) many states [46]. With the same argument, we can deduce that the size of the resulting automaton A× is in 2Oe(2Oe(|AE|)·|A≤|·|T |), which is equivalent to the claim. ⊓⊔